7. A Terrible Year 1992 was a very bad year for the royal family.
In January, holiday photographs of Fergie and Steve Wyatt appeared in the newspapers.
The British people were shocked. Fergie's marriage to Prince Andrew was finished.
Wyatt went back to America. Then Fergie became friends with an American
called John Bryan. In February, Charles and Diana went to India.
Photographers took pictures of Diana in front of the Taj Mahal. The history of the Taj Mahal
is very romantic. An Indian emperor built it for his dead wife. Diana sat in front of
it alone. Charles was at a business meeting. On the 29th of March, Diana's father Johnny
died suddenly. Diana was on a skiing holiday with Charles
and the boys in Austria. Her father's death was a terrible shock.
Diana flew back to London. On the 1st of April, Diana drove to Allthorpe for the funeral,
the ceremony for a dead person, and Charles came later by helicopter. Diana did not like
Rain, Johnny's wife, but at the funeral she spoke to Rain and held her hand. After this,
Diana's relationship with Rain was better. Andrew Morton's book about Diana was ready.
He called it Diana, her true story. Diana wanted the British people to know the truth
about her life. But now she was worried. The royal family did not know anything about the book.
Perhaps the book was not a good idea. On the 7th of June, 1992, the Sunday Times newspaper
printed a part of Andrew Morton's book. For the first time, people read about Diana's
bulimia. They read about Charles and Camilla. They learned how Charles was cold to Diana.
Now people could not believe in the royal fairy story. They were very shocked.
The British people began to dislike Prince Charles. Charles is a bad husband and not a very good
father, they said. He doesn't care about Diana. He only cares about himself and Camilla Parker
Bowles. The royal family asked questions. Andrew Morton did not write this book alone,
they said. So Diana's friends talked to him. But did Diana know about this book?
The husband of Diana's sister Jane was Robert Fellows, private secretary to the queen.
Did you know about Andrew Morton's book? He asked Diana. No, replied Diana. Fellows believed her,
but later he found out the truth. Diana became more popular because of Andrew Morton's book.
At the end of June, 1992, she went to Belfast in Northern Ireland.
We want die. We want die, shouted the people.
In August, 1992, the Sun newspaper printed stories about Diana and James Gilby,
and Diana and James Hewitt. Later, Diana and Charles went to Korea. But the visit was not
successful. Charles and Diana did not look happy together. In November, Diana went to Paris alone.
The problems between Charles and Diana grew worse. On the 25th of November,
they met at Kensington Palace and talked about a separation. On the 9th of December,
the Prime Minister John Major gave a speech to the British Parliament.
The prince and princess of Wales have decided to separate, he said, but they had no plans to divorce.
In her Christmas speech at the end of the year, the queen called 1992 a horrible year for the royal family.
Chapter 8. Princess Alone
Diana was now alone, and she wanted a normal private life.
Because she was the princess of Wales, she had a policeman with her all the time,
but now Diana decided she did not need a policeman. Without a policeman, it was easy for the newspaper
reporters and photographers to follow her. They waited for her outside Kensington Palace.
They waited for her when she went out in London. They waited for her at airports when she went on holiday.
Diana's sons, Prince William and Prince Harry, were the centre of her life.
Diana was a very good mother. She wanted William and Harry to have a normal life and to have fun
like other children. So she took them out to the cinema or McDonald's or shopping.
She did not want them to see only rich people like the royal family.
She wanted them to meet people in the normal world too, people with sad and difficult lives.
She took William to the Passage Day Centre in London. The centre was a place for people who live on the
streets. William met the people there and talked to them. William was only a young boy,
but he was like Diana. He was very good at talking to people.
Later Diana took Harry to the centre for homeless people too.
When William and Harry were at home with her, Diana spent a lot of time with them.
But most of the time they were away at boarding school. Then Diana was lonely at home by herself.
Soon Diana met a new man, Oliver Hall. Oliver Hall was very good looking and popular.
He knew a lot about art and bought and sold Islamic art. He was married. Oliver and his wife were
friends of Prince Charles. Poor and Diana talked to each other on the phone and met at Diana's
friend's houses. Diana was still doing her charity work. In March 1993 she visited Nepal.
In July she visited Zimbabwe. She visited a hospital where there were children with AIDS.
The children were only five years old, but they had no parents. Diana cried when she saw them.
She went to the countryside and gave food to poor and hungry children.
At home Diana became interested in women's problems. In April 1993 she gave a speech about
eating problems in young women. The newspapers were still very interested in Diana.
She had very little private life and this was very hard for her.
At a dinner on the 3rd of December 1993 at the Dorchester Hotel in London she made a speech.
She said the newspaper and television reporters made her life very difficult. She had no private
life and needed more time alone. She did not want to do so many things in public.
She did not want to do so much charity work. Oliver Hall left his wife.
But in January 1994 he went back to her. He did not want to leave his family for Diana.
Then in March James Hewitt gave an interview to a reporter from the Daily Express.
The newspaper printed the story of Hewitt's relationship with Diana.
Now the British people knew about Diana's relationship with Hewitt.
Later that year Hewitt published a book about his time with Diana. The book was called Princess in Love.
People already knew about Diana's story from Andrew Morton's book. They felt very sorry for her.
This made Charles very angry. So he decided to tell the British people about his life too.
He asked a journalist, Jonathan Dimbleby, to write a biography, a book about Charles's life.
He also did an interview with Jonathan Dimbleby on television. Many of Charles's friends did not
want him to do the interview. It is not a good idea for the prince to talk about his personal life
on television, they said. But Charles did not listen to his friends.
The interview was on television on the 29th of June 1994. Charles talked about the British
countryside and about his work with young people. But he also talked about a relationship with
another woman. People thought this woman was Camilla Parker Bowles. Millions of people watched
the interview. They were very shocked. While Charles was married to Diana, he had a girlfriend.
Seven months later, Andrew and Camilla Parker Bowles divorced.
Chapter 9 The Road to Divorce
Diana went to the United States in October 1994. The American people liked her very much.
Her visit was very successful. She met important people like Hillary Clinton and General Colin Powell.
She talked to Hillary about her children and her plans for the future.
Soon Diana returned to London. She started her charity work again.
She visited two special hospitals for people with mental problems.
Later in 1994, she went to see people in the poor parts of Paris.
At the end of her visit, the French president, President Mitterrand, gave a dinner for her at
the Palace of Versailles. He invited 900 people. Diana was not with her husband now,
but she had some very good friends. These friends helped her a lot.
One very close friend was Lucia Fletcher de Lima. Lucia lived in Washington with her husband,
but she spoke to Diana a lot on the telephone. She gave Diana advice and helped her.
Other good friends were Lady Annabelle Goldsmith, Rosa Monkton, and Carolyn Bartholomew, her old flatmate.
In 1995, Diana visited 10 countries around the world. All of her visits were very successful.
One was to Japan. Diana made a speech to the people in Japanese.
Later, Diana went to Hong Kong. She raised a quarter of a million pounds for charities for young people and for medical work.
Diana also went to Italy, France, New York, Russia, and Argentina.
In 1994, Diana made only 10 public visits, but in 1995, she made 127.
Diana's relationship with Oliver Hall was over.
The newspapers started to write stories about a new male friend.
This was Will Carling, an English rugby player, and captain of the England rugby team.
People were shocked. Diana liked another married man.
In 1995, Diana met Martin Beshear, a well-known journalist.
Beshear worked for the BBC's television programme, Panorama.
He wanted Diana to do an interview on television.
The BBC showed the interview on the 20th of November 1995.
Diana looked beautiful but sad.
She wore black clothes and black makeup around her eyes.
Diana talked about her relationship with Charles and the royal family.
She talked about Camilla Parker Bowles.
There were three of us in this marriage, she said.
She talked about Andrew Morton's book, Her Bellemia, and her relationship with James Hewitt.
I want to help people with problems, she said.
15 million people in Britain watched the interview.
Millions of other people around the world watched it too.
They were shocked. Diana's friends thought the interview was a terrible mistake.
The royal family were also very upset.
After the interview, Princess Margaret did not want to be friends with Diana anymore.
In December 1995, Diana had a letter from the Queen.
The Queen wanted Charles and Diana to divorce.
She was worried about her country and the royal family.
Later, on the 15th of February 1996, Diana met the Queen at Buckingham Palace.
I do not want to divorce, said Diana. I still love Charles.
Diana and the Queen talked about William and Harry and about Diana's future.
Later in February 1996, Diana met with Prince Charles.
They talked about the end of their marriage.
On the 28th of August 1996, they were divorced.
After the divorce, Diana lost her title, her royal highness, and her special place in the royal family.
She was now just Diana, Princess of Wales.
I never wanted a divorce, Diana wrote.
I always dreamed of a happy marriage, but the fairy tale marriage was over.
In the last few years, Diana was married to the Queen, and she was married to the Queen.
Chapter 10. Starting a new life
Diana was alone, and she had to make a new life for herself.
She knew many rich and famous people, but she did not only want to spend time with them,
she wanted a normal life, and she wanted to help the poor and the sick.
Diana had many beautiful dresses and other clothes, but she did not need these clothes now.
They were from her old life with Prince Charles. She did not want to wear them again,
but she did not know what to do with them. Then Prince William had a good idea.
Sell the clothes and make money for charity, he said.
Christie's a famous auction house helped Diana. At an auction, a lot of people come to see things
that are for sale. The person who offers the most money for an object can buy it.
In September 1996, a person from Christie's went to see Diana at Kensington Palace.
They talked about the sale of Diana's clothes at an auction. Diana wanted the sale to be in New
York. She wanted the money to help people with AIDS. Diana also wanted to help people in other
countries. She was very worried about landmines. A landmine is a bomb which is put under the ground.
It explodes when a person or car moves over it.
Many countries use landmines in wars. Landmines are very dangerous.
People, often women and children, die or lose arms or legs because of landmines.
Many people did not know about landmines, and Diana wanted to tell the world about them.
She wanted to stop countries from using landmines in war.
She talked to the British Red Cross, and in January 1997, she went to Angola for the Red Cross.
There was terrible war in Angola, and there were many landmines in that country.
People who worked for the television company the BBC went with Diana and filmed her.
She met people with terrible landmine injuries. She worked hard and visited dangerous places.
She walked in parts of the countryside where there were landmines. But she was not afraid.
She went to hospitals and talked to children with injuries from landmines.
She sat with them and held their hands.
Diana also wanted to help people with eating problems.
In the UK, in May 1997, she made a speech.
I don't have problems with bulimia anymore, she said.
Diana looked beautiful and healthy.
Diana was very busy.
In May, she and Prince William went to lunch with the new British Prime Minister, Tony Blair and his family.
They talked about Diana's future.
In June, Diana flew to Washington to meet Hillary Clinton.
Then she went to New York to meet Mother Teresa. She liked Mother Teresa's work very much.
Later that year, in June, she flew back to New York for a party at Christie's auction house.
The party was before the sale of Diana's clothes. The sale was a great success.
All Diana's dresses sold for a total of $3,258,750.
The top price was $222,500 for a dress.
Diana wore this dress when she danced with John Travolta.
Chapter 11
New Love
There was a new man in Diana's life.
Diana knew a woman called Una Shanley Tofolo.
Una's husband, Joseph, had a problem with his heart.
In August 1995, he was very ill. He went to the Royal Brompton Hospital in London.
He had a heart operation.
On August the 31st, Una telephone Diana. Diana went quickly to the hospital.
She met Joseph's doctors. One of them was Hasnut Khan.
Hasnut Khan was from Pakistan. He was 36 years old and very good looking.
Diana often went to the hospital. She met Hasnut Khan many times.
She was very interested in his work. Sometimes she watched him doing operations.
Diana and Hasnut Khan were good friends. Soon, they became more than friends.
Diana often called Hasnut Khan at the hospital. But when she called him,
she did not use her real name. Sometimes she called herself Dr. Armani.
Sometimes Diana and Hasnut Khan had dinner in small restaurants in London.
But Khan usually came to Kensington Palace. Diana was very happy.
Diana was very much in love with Hasnut Khan. Khan cared about people and he saved lives.
Diana liked this. She began reading medical books so she could talk to him about his work.
Khan was also very kind to her. And he liked Diana the person, not because she was a princess.
Hasnut Khan's religion was Islam. So Diana also began reading books about Islam.
And she became very interested in Pakistan. She bought Pakistani women's clothes.
Diana's good friend, Lady Annabelle Goldsmith, had a young and beautiful daughter,
Jemima. Jemima was married to the famous Pakistani cricket player, Imran Khan.
Imran Khan was interested in Pakistani politics. He also had a hospital in Pakistan for people
with cancer, a serious illness. Diana became very friendly with Jemima Khan.
She talked to her about marriage to a Pakistani man.
Diana went to Lahore, Pakistan, in February and May of 1996.
She visited Jemima and Imran Khan and Imran Khan's hospital. She talked to many children with
cancer and helped them a lot. Many photographs appeared in the newspapers of Diana with sick
children. At first, Diana and Hasnut's relationship was secret. But later the newspapers found out
about it. Hasnut Khan was very unhappy. He did not want the newspapers to write stories about him
and Diana. He did not want his photograph in all the newspapers. He did not want to be famous
because he was Diana's lover. Diana wanted to marry Khan. But the most important thing in
Hasnut Khan's life was his work. He wanted to be a good doctor and to work in Pakistan, his home
country. He did not want to be Diana's husband. Diana and Khan's relationship finished. Diana
still wanted to marry him. But she knew that they had no future. That same summer, Diana met another
man, Dodi Al-Fayed.
Chapter 12 The Last Summer
Dodi Al-Fayed's father was Mohammed Al-Fayed.
Mohammed Al-Fayed was Egyptian and he was very rich. He had nine houses, a private plane,
a helicopter, many expensive cars and a film company. In 1979, he bought the Ritz Hotel in Paris.
And in 1984, he bought the most famous shop in London. Harrods.
Mohammed Al-Fayed liked British people. He wanted to be part of British society.
He wanted famous people like Diana to be his friends. So in the summer of 1997,
he invited Diana and her sons to stay with him and his family. They could stay at his home
near Santa Fe in the south of France. Diana had no summer plans for herself and her sons.
So she said yes to Mohammed. Mohammed bought a beautiful yacht, the Johnacal. It cost £15 million.
16 sailors worked on the boat. Mohammed telephoned his son, Dodi. At that time,
Dodi was in Paris with his fiancé, the woman he planned to marry.
She was an American model called Kelly Fisher.
Mohammed told his son to leave Kelly and come and meet Diana.
On the 14th of July, he sent his private plane to Paris. The plane took Dodi to the family villa.
Dodi fired was 42 years old. He had the life of a playboy. His father gave him lots of money
and he spent it on having fun and driving fast cars. He was also successful with women
because he was good looking and kind. On the 16th of July, Diana and the boys flew in
Mohammed's private plane to France. They stayed in his villa, the Castel Santalene,
and spent time on his yacht. The photographers followed Diana to the south of France.
They waited in boats near Mohammed's villa. They took pictures of Diana by the swimming pool
and having fun in the sea. The photographers saw Dodi with Diana,
but they did not know who he was. They thought he was a sailor from the John Echal.
They did not know he was Mohammed Al Fayed's son, but they saw that Diana looked very happy.
Kelly Fisher, Dodi's fiancé, saw photos of Diana and Dodi in the newspapers.
She was very angry. She called Dodi but he did not answer. So she telephoned Dodi's father,
Mohammed. But Diana was more important for Mohammed than Kelly.
Forget about Dodi, Mohammed told her, you and Dodi are finished.
Diana wrote a letter to Dodi. She thanked him for a wonderful holiday together.
Darling Dodi, she wrote, thank you for the most magical six days on the ocean waves.
On the 20th of July, Diana flew back to London. There she met Hasnut Khan,
but their relationship was finished. In late July, Diana flew back to Paris.
She met Dodi for a day. On the 31st of July, she flew back to the John Echal.
William and Harry were not with her this time. They were on holiday with Prince Charles in Scotland.
Diana and Dodi went to Corsica and Sardinia on the John Echal. Diana was very happy and relaxed.
But the photographers followed them and took photos. The newspapers in London paid a lot
of money for these photos. On the 8th of August, Diana went to Bosnia to talk about landmines.
She visited Sarajevo and met people with injuries from landmines.
Then she went on holiday to Greece with her friend, Rosa Monkton.
But Diana and Dodi spent time together too in August. They stayed together in London and on the John Echal.
The photographers were there all the time. They came when Diana and Dodi had a romantic
walk on a beach. They flew in helicopters over the John Echal.
On the 30th of August, Diana and Dodi went to Paris. But the photographers found out their plans.
The photographers waited for them at the airport. They followed their car on motorbikes,
trying to take photographs. Diana and Dodi went to Dodi's apartment to dress for dinner.
The photographers waited outside the apartment, shouting and pushing. Dodi was angry.
When Diana and Dodi came out of the apartment, the photographers were still there.
They got on their bikes and drove very near the car. It was very dangerous.
A table was reserved for dinner at a restaurant called Che Benoit.
But Dodi did not want the photographers to follow them there. So he changed their plans
and decided to have dinner at the Ritz Hotel. They drove to the Ritz. But the photographers were
there too. Diana got out of the car and ran inside. Dodi and Diana had dinner upstairs in the Ritz.
At dinner, Dodi made a plan to lose the photographers. Dodi's car was at the front door of the hotel.
But Dodi decided to use another car at the back door. The photographers did not know about this car.
The assistant head of security at the Ritz was called Henri Paul.
Dodi told Henri Paul about his plan. He wanted him to drive the secret car.
Diana and Dodi left by the back door. Trevor Reese Jones, a man who worked for the
fires and protected Diana, went too. Dodi sat in the back behind Henri Paul. Diana was on
Dodi's right side. Nobody in the car wore a seat belt. At about midnight, Paul drove quickly away
from the hotel. But the photographers soon saw the car. Quickly they got onto their motorbikes
and followed it. Henri Paul tried to lose the photographers. He did not take the direct road,
the Champs-Elysé, back to Dodi's apartment. He decided to drive down the tunnel under the
plastama. Henri Paul was driving too fast and he had alcohol in his body. Only three minutes
after leaving the Ritz hotel, the car crashed into part of the tunnel. Dodi and Paul were killed.
But Trevor Reese Jones and Diana were still alive.
About 10 to 15 photographers arrived in seconds and started taking photographs of Diana.
Only two of them called for help on their mobile phones. People were very shocked
because the photographers did not help the people in the car. When the police arrived,
they arrested seven of the photographers. A doctor, Frederick Mallet, was in the tunnel.
He tried to help Diana. Diana did not look badly hurt, but the injuries inside her body were terrible.
The ambulances arrived. They took Diana to La Pitea's São Petrière hospital.
But the doctors there could not save her. At 4 a.m. Paris time, on the morning of the 31st
of August 1997, Diana died. The British ambassador in Paris, Sir Michael J, came to the hospital.
He telephoned the Queen's assistant private secretary, Sir Robin Janverin, in London.
Diana is dead, he said. Janverin told the Queen and Prince Philip.
Chapter 13 The People's Princess
People all over the world heard the sad and terrible news, but nobody could believe it.
How could Diana be dead? It could not be true.
Princess William and Harry were at Balmoral in Scotland, with Prince Charles and the Queen and
Prince Philip. Prince Charles told them about their mother's death. Tony Blair was the new British
Prime Minister. The morning after Diana's death, he spoke about Diana and the British people.
They liked her. They loved her as one of the people, he said.
She was the people's princess, and that's how she will stay, in all our hearts and memories forever.
Prince Charles and Diana's two sisters, Sarah and Jane, flew to Paris.
They brought Diana's body back to London. Sarah wanted a quiet funeral for Diana at the
Spencer family home in all Thorpe, but thousands of people waited by the road from the airport.
There was not going to be a quiet funeral. Diana's body was taken to the Chapel Royal at St. James's
Palace. Then it was taken to Kensington Palace.
Charles Spencer, Diana's brother, lived in South Africa. He flew to London immediately.
Diana's mother, Frances, was at her home in Scotland on the Isle of Sile. She too came to London.
But the royal family was still at Balmoral on holiday. The British people began to ask questions,
why aren't the royal family here in London? They said, do they care?
Said one popular British newspaper, The Sun. Where is the queen when the country needs her?
Why doesn't the queen talk to the British people about Diana? Ask the people.
People began to dislike the royal family. The royal family was cold and did not care about Diana,
they said. People said these things, but still the queen and the royal family stayed in Scotland.
People put flowers outside the gates of Kensington Palace. The number of flowers grew and grew.
People wrote cards and left messages for Diana. They waited for hours to sign a special book
to remember Diana. Then at last, on Friday the 5th of September, the royal family returned to London.
The queen made a speech and the family walked in the streets with the people.
Finally, they began to understand the feelings of the people.
Diana's funeral was on the 6th of September 1997.
More than 1 million people came to London and many more watched the funeral on television.
Prince William and Prince Harry walked behind Diana's coffin, the box where her body was.
Diana's favourite white flowers were on top of the coffin.
Prince Harry, who was only 12 years old, wrote one word on a card. The word was mummy.
This card was on the coffin too. When people saw the card, they felt very sad.
The coffin went from Kensington Palace to Westminster Abbey for the funeral.
Thousands of people stood quietly by the road. Many people cried.
Famous people from all over the world came to the funeral service.
Bill and Hillary Clinton came. There were actors like Tom Cruise, Tom Hanks and Nicole Kidman.
There were singers like Sting, Elton John and George Michael.
There were Diana's old school friends like Carolyn Bartholomew and her old headmistress from West
Heath School. There were Diana's new friends like Lucia Fletcher de Lima. Hasnad Khan was
there and Imran Khan and Jemima. And there were many people from Diana's charities.
Elton John sang a beautiful song, Candle in the Wind. He first wrote it for Marilyn Monroe
but wrote new words for Diana. Diana and Marilyn Monroe died at exactly the same age, 36.
Diana's brother Charles made a speech at the funeral.
Diana's name means Huntress, he said. But Diana became the most hunted woman in the world.
Outside, thousands of people listened. When Charles finished, they began to clap their hands.
After the funeral, the coffin went very slowly to Althorp, the Spencer family home.
People in the streets of London threw flowers.
At Althorp, Charles Spencer said, Diana is home.
Diana is now buried in the ground on a small island. The island is in a lake in the garden at Althorp.
There are trees all round the lake. It is the perfect place for a princess at peace.
Chapter 14 After Diana's death
The Diana Princess of Wales Memorial Fund
The Diana Princess of Wales Memorial Fund was started on the 14th of September, 1997.
When it began, there was 19 million pounds in the fund. Money that Diana left and money from
Prince Charles was put into the fund. Money from the people of Britain and money from the
sales of Sir Elton John's song, Candle in the Wind, was also put in. The fund gives money to
people for three reasons. The first reason is to stop the use of landmines and to help people
hurt by landmines. The second is to help people in Africa who are dying from an illness,
for example, AIDS. The third is to give money to help young people in the UK with special difficulties.
The president of the fund is Lady Sarah McCorkidale, Diana's oldest sister.
Charles and Camilla
Prince Charles married Camilla Parker Bowles on the 9th of April 2005.
After the wedding, the Queen gave a party for Charles and Camilla at Windsor Castle.
Later Charles and Camilla went to Scotland. Camilla's title is now Her Royal Highness,
the Duchess of Cornwall. Sometimes Charles and Camilla carry out royal duties together.
Concert for Diana
On the 1st of July 2007, about 10 years after Princess Diana died, there was a concert for her in London.
The 1st of July was Diana's birthday. Prince William and Prince Harry planned the concert.
They invited many of the world's most famous singers and entertainers to come there.
They invited Sir Elton John, the English National Ballet, Brian Ferry, Andrea Bocelli,
Rod Stewart and take that. The concert was eight hours long and was very successful.
People in 140 countries watched the concert on television or heard it on the radio.
63,000 people came to Wembley Stadium to see the concert.
At the end, a video of Diana as a child was shown.
The music for the video was the song by the pop group Queen. These are the days of our lives.
There is now a DVD of the concert.
The money from the concert went to charities chosen by Prince William and Prince Harry.
The charities were the Diana Princess of Wales Memorial Fund,
Centipoint Charity for the Homeless and Centibale. A charity started in April 2006
by Prince Harry and Prince Ciosio of Lesotho, a small country in South Africa.
This charity helps children and young people in Lesotho.
There are many children in Lesotho whose parents have died of AIDS.
Diana is dead, but her memory lives on. People all around the world still want
to see photographs and read books about her. They still want to know about the beautiful
and caring princess who touched people's hearts all over the world.
For more information, visit our website at www.beadaholique.com to purchase beading supplies and to get design ideas!